[ADR] EventBus (and RabbitMQ implementation details) (#3352)
linagora/james-project: src/adr/0036-eventbus.md

# 36. Event bus

Date: 2020-05-05

## Status

Accepted (lazy consensus)

## Context

> Many features relies on behaviors triggered by interactions with the mailbox API main interfaces (`RightManager`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many features rely on behaviors triggered by interactions with the mailbox API main interfaces (`RightManager`,
```

`MailboxManager`, `MessageManager`, `MessageIdManager`). We need to provide a convenient extension mechanism for 
organizing the execution of these behaviours, provide retries and advanced error handling.

> Also, protocols enables notifications upon mailbox modifications. This is for instance the case for `RFC-2177 IMAP IDLE`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, protocols enable notifications upon mailbox modifications. This is for instance the case for `RFC-2177 IMAP IDLE`,
```

> is leveraged for `RFC-3501 IMAP unsolicitated notifications` when selecting a Mailbox, as well as maintaining the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
leveraged for `RFC-3501 IMAP unsolicitated notifications` when selecting a Mailbox, as well as maintaining the 
```

`IMAP Message Sequence Number <-> Unique IDentifier` MSN <-> UID mapping. Changes happening for a specific entity 

> (mailbox) needs to be propagated to the relevant listeners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(mailbox) need to be propagated to the relevant listeners.
```

enriching mailbox managers features or enabling user notifications upon mailboxes operations performed by other devices 
via other protocol sessions.

Interactions happen via the managers (`RightManager`, `MailboxManager`, `MessageManager`, `MessageIdManager`) which emit an
event on the `EventBus`, which will ensure the relevant `MailboxListener`s will be executed at least once.

`MailboxListener` can be registered in a work queue fashion on the `EventBus`. Each work queue corresponds to a given 
MailboxListener class with the same configuration, identified by their group. Each event is executed at least once
within a James cluster, errors are retried with an exponential back-off delay. If the execution keeps failing, the event
 is stored in `DeadLetter` for later reprocessing, triggered via WebAdmin.

Guice products enable the registration of additional mailbox listeners. A user can furthermore define its own 
mailboxListeners via the use of `extension-jars`.

MailboxListener can also be registered to be executed only on events concerning a specific entity (eg. a mailbox). The 

> `registrationKey` identifying entities concerned by the event. Upon event emission, the manager will indicate the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`registrationKey` is identifying entities concerned by the event. Upon event emission, the manager will indicate the 
```

# 36. Event bus

Date: 2020-05-05

## Status

Accepted (lazy consensus)

## Context

> James mailbox uses an event driven architecture. 

Reviewer 2: what is James mailbox?

Author: James mailbox core components.

The definition of the mailbox core components, entities, responsibilities, sub-components and implementations might be a really good topic for yet-another ADR but I must admit I reach too much nested ADR to be happy to write yet-another one.

What explanation/dis-ambiguation do you expect?

Reviewer 2: James mailbox is a technical module in our code. I find it a little harsh in a "Context" part of an ADR.
I thus suggest that you use a more generic term, of that you remove "mailbox" from this first sentence.

Author: Let me disagree.

The eventbus so far is a mailbox sub-component. The proof is that its interface is in mailbox-api. So I cannot speak of the eventbus without this context.

Generifying it to unbound it from aits mailbox context may have some benefits but it is a decision still to make (and will require an ADR).

So then I see no other solution than to write a "define me the mailbox ADR"...

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure you really need an ADR just to define one term. My fear is that without knowing that "mailbox" is a core James component, one can understand this sentence with mailbox meaning user mailbox, and hence it makes no sense. Cannot we just clarify this mailbox thing?

Maybe just `James mailbox component` would do the trick, or to be better selft explaining `James mailbox component, a core component of James handling the storage of mails and mailboxes,`...

It means every meaningful action on mailboxes or messages triggers an event for any component to react to that event.
`MailboxListener` allows executing actions upon mailbox events. They could be used for a wide variety of purposes, like 

> enriching mailbox managers features or enabling user notifications upon concurrent mailboxes operations.

Reviewer 3: what does concurrent means here?

Interactions happen via the managers (`RightManager`, `MailboxManager`, `MessageManager`, `MessageIdManager`) which emit an
event on the EventBus, which will ensure the relevant MailboxListeners will be executed at least once.

> `MailboxListener` can be registered in a work queue fashion on the `EventBus`. Each work queue correspond to a given 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`MailboxListener` can be registered in a work queue fashion on the `EventBus`. Each work queue corresponds to a given 
```

MailboxListener class with the same configuration, identified by their group. Each event is executed at least once
within a James cluster, errors are retried with an exponential back-off delay. If the execution keeps failing, the event
 is stored in `DeadLetter` for later reprocessing, triggered via WebAdmin.

Guice products enable the registration of additional mailbox listeners. A user can furthermore define its own 
mailboxListeners via the use of `extension-jars`.

> MailboxListener can also be registered on a notification fashion on the eventBus. A mailbox listener can be registered 

Reviewer 3: > MailboxListener can also be registered on a notification fashion on the eventBus

What do you mean?

via a `registrationKey` identifying entities concerned by the event. Upon event emission, the manager will indicate the 

> `registrationKey` this event should be sent to. A mailboxListener will thus only receive the event for the registration 

Reviewer 3: Could you give examples of `registrationKey`s because with this generic definition, it doesn't really help the reader to understand what he can expect from that feature?

key it is registered to.

> ## Features

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Current usages
```

> The following features are leveraged through the use of Group mailbox listeners:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following features are implemented as Group mailbox listeners:
```

Reviewer 3: I think we should keep the workqueue semantic instead of "group" which is a very generic term

 - Email indexing in Lucene or ElasticSearch
 - Deletion of mailbox annotations
 - Cassandra Message metadata cleanup upon deletion

>  - Current Quota updates

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Quota updates
```

>  - Quota indexation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Quota indexing
```

>  - OverQuota mailing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Over Quota mailing
```

 - SpamAssassin Spam/Ham reporting

## Decision

Provide an InVM version of the EventBus. This implementation is not distributed.

Provide a distributed implementation of the EventBus leveraging RabbitMQ.

> Events will be emitted to a single Exchange.

Reviewer 3: please have a sub-section to put RabbitMQ specifics into

Author: I decided to provide a separate ADR

> Events will be emitted to a single Exchange.

Reviewer 3: we should not mix present/future tenses: everything is supposed to be at present

> Each group will have a corresponding queue, bound to the main exchange, with a default routing key. Each eventBus

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each group will have a corresponding queue, bound to the main exchange, with a default routing key. Each `EventBus`
```

> will consume this queue and execute the relevant listener, ensuring at least once execution at the cluster level.

Reviewer 3: Why there's several eventbus now? it lacks some explanations

Retries are managed via a dedicated exchange for each group: as we need to count retries, the message headers need to 

> be altered and we cannot rely on rabbitMQ build in retries. Each time the execution fails locally, a new event is emitted 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be altered and we cannot rely on RabbitMQ built-in retries. Each time the execution fails locally, a new event is emitted 
```

via the dedicated exchange, and the original event is acknowledged.

> Each eventBus will have a dedicated exclusive queue, bound to the main exchange with the registrationKeys used by local 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each eventBus will have a dedicated exclusive queue, bound to the main exchange with the `registrationKeys` used by local 
```

notification mailboxListeners (to only receive the corresponding subset of events). Errors are not retried for 

> notification.

Reviewer 3: > Errors are not retried for notification.

It's not specific to RabbitMQ and it's probably better describe as "at most once"

> # 35. Event bus

Reviewer: Still wrong number, should be 36
